>> Kyle: Now that you're feeling more
comfortable with the idea of operations at
a data structure level, we're gonna
zero in on, perhaps one of the most
famous of all the functional programming
confusions out there, which is the Monad.
And I'm gonna go ahead and tell you right
now, this is the very first time that I've
ever put this information into a course,
because it's a set of information,
a set of learnings that is
continually evolving for me.
And this is by no means,
an exhaustive look at all things monad,
it's not the mathematical approach, but
I just want essentially to get it so
that monads are not a scary thing.
I just wanna demystify the concept
of a monad, because it is not, as so
many people have said, a burrito or
an onion, or any of these other
silly sorts of metaphors.
And it's also not some sort of scary
concept that we have to run away
screaming.
It is a very useful concept in the larger
canon of functional programming theory.
And really what it boils down to is that
a Monad is a way of creating a functional,
friendly data structure.
We've looked at lists,
we've looked at objects,
we could talk about binary trees, but
another kind of data structure is one that
might hold just one single discreet value.
And you might think,
why do I need a data structure for
one single discrete value
like the number 42?
And the reason is, because data structures
are not just about the values they hold,
but about the behaviors that
they create around those values.
A monad is a wrapper, if you will,
around the value with a set of behaviors
in it that is going to make that value
much easier to interoperate with other
values in a very specific kind of way.
One of the characteristics of
a monad is that it turns that single
value into a functor.
That's not the completeness of a monad,
but
it does turn that value into a functor.
Remember that term, I said it earlier when
we were talking about lists and I said,
any value where we can map
an operation over it is a functor.
So if a monad has a map method on it,
then it's a functor.
What might we wanna do with
a single value in a map?
We might wanna transform that
value into some other value,
that's a way of modeling state change,
where I have a value and
it becomes another value,
we can model that as a mapping operation.
I know some of you have
heard this term before,
monad is just a monoid in
the category of endofunctors, and
that's generally thrown around as kind
of like a joke, because it's like,
how many crazy weird words can we throw
into a sentence and still be valid?
I don't think that's an useful definition,
I know that it actually means
something to functional programmers.
But I don't think it's
an useful definition,
cuz it uses a lot of things that
none of us are familiar with.
First of all, we barely can understand
that a monad is a data structure, and
then we throw in monoid, what's that?
And then category, crap,
we're talking about category theory, and
now endofunctors?
I heard you say functor, but
what on earth is an endofunctor?
That sounds like a planet in
the Star Wars movie, okay?
That's not a real thing
that we could connect
to something that we have
any sort of intuition about.
So this is a bad definition, but
let me try to give you a lamer or
a more approachable sort of definition.
It's just a pattern for pairing some
piece of data with a set of predictable
behaviors that let it interact
with other pairings of data and
behavior, in other words monads.
So monads are a way to take a value and
make it behave in such a way
that is gonna be predictable with
other values that are also monads.
It's not actually that scary, it's just
a set of formalized techniques for
making values easy to interact
in a very specific, and
it turns out mathematical sort of a way.
Now, monads in languages like Haskell
have a very specific way of looking.
When we're in a non functional
programming language like JavaScript,
we have to do a bit of interpretation.
And there are actually a lot of different
ways that I could code up a monad, and
different kinds of monads, obviously, but
there's a lot of different ways
that I could code up a monad.
And I just wanna tell
you right off the bat,
that I'm definitely being very informal
here, as informal as I can do and
still be even remotely true
to the spirit of a monad.
So this is not code that I want you to go
take and put in production, and then say,
hey everybody,
I've got a full blown monad.
You wanna use a library that has
implemented these things and
has all of the is dotted and
ts crossed in terms of working with stuff,
but I just want to illustrate
this concept of a monad.
And I've got a code snippet here, but
you'll notice I've got a bunch of code
hidden right now, because what I want you
to see, I'm showing you the first of,
this is maybe the most basic of the monads
that we could talk about, which is called,
Just, it's literally called, Just.
And what Just is as a monad,
is just a wrapper around a single value.
Now that single value can be
even something like an object or
an array,
it doesn't have to be the number 42,
but from the perspective of the monad
it's a single discreet entity.
And you might wanna do a thing where
the single discreet entity to make it into
another single discreet
entity wrapped in a monad.
Just like with arrays, every time
we do a map we get another array,
if you do a monad and you call a map
on it, you're gonna get another monad.
Same sort of deal here.
So, you'll notice that a Just instance,
a monad that is a Just monad,
has a map method, a chain method and
an AP, an ap method.
That's it, those three.
But there are definitely often more
methods on different kinds of monads.
But those are the kind of three
core methods that are gonna be on
all the monads, and by the way, chain
is often referred to with other names.
So how would we implement those map,
chain and ap?
Before I even show you the implementation,
I just want you to see, is just
an object with three methods on it.
And it's gonna be closed over
a single value that we passed in,
cuz those methods are gonna have
closure and access to val from line 1.
So it's just a value wrapped in some
closure with three methods exposed.
It's not really that complex of
a concept to be honest with you.
It's really just a formalized
way of making that value
be able to interact with other values.
Okay, let's take a look at how we
might implement map, chain and ap.
And remember, map, chain and
ap here are definitely,
I'm giving you the simplest shortcut
way of illustrating what they do.
Here's a map function that takes
a function, calls our closed over val,
line 7, we call our closed over
val with that function, and
whatever that thing returns,
we just make another Just out of it.
Just like in an array map we have to make
a new array in a monad map we have to make
another monad, and
the kind of monad that we're gonna make is
the kind of monad that we're already in.
Arrays make arrays, objects make objects,
monads make monads.
>> Kyle: So, if I had the number 42, and
I'm not inside of a monad, and I called
map on that monad with a mapper function
that imcremented it, what am I gonna get?
A monad that has 43 in it.
That's all that means,
that's the functor nature of a monad,
that we can map over that value and
produce another monad from it.
Now let's look at chain, again, chain
kinda cutting some corners here, is not
intended to be mathematically accurate,
it's just to illustrate the idea here.
Chain is oftentimes referred to in other
implementations as either bind, or
sometimes, and I actually prefer, flatMap.
We've talked about map before, but
we haven't really talked about
flatMap in this course, and I just wanna
briefly mention what flatMap does.
FlatMap is actually a strange name,
because it's the reverse,
it really ought to be called map flat.
Because what flatMap does is,
it maps over a data structure and
then, as it's doing that mapping,
it's flattening it one level,
what do I mean by flattening?
Well, the best way for
you to visualize that is with arrays.
If I had a single dimensional array
of numbers and I did a map over it,
I'd end up with another single
dimensional array of numbers.
But what if my mapper function
returned back tuples?
Instead of taking the number 3 and
returning back 4,
what if it returned back 4,5 for example?
You know, an array or 4 and 5.
Well, now I'd have a two-dimensional
array, wouldn't I?
I'd have an array of tuples, and
you might want an array of tuples, but
you also might want just one flat array
of all the numbers having been combined.
So that flatMap is a way of
taking that nested data type,
like an array inside of an array,
and flattening it out one level.
So if our mapper returned tuples,
and we did flatMap instead of map,
we'd get just a single dimensional array
of all the numbers kind of squished or
flattened out into one big array.
So, when we talk about
flatMap in terms of monad,
that's like doing a mapping,
getting a monad, and
then flattening it out into
the underlying value from the monad.
Here I'm shortcutting, and just not even
going to the trouble of making the monad,
I'm just doing the FN call, and
whatever it returns we're giving it out.
That's not technically true to the spirit
of Monad but it gives you an idea that,
if I call chain on a monad,
I'm gonna get whatever the return
value is of that mapper function.
It's supposed to be another monad, but
in this case we could end up not
being another monad entirely, and
then, that's where we'd start
violating those monad laws.
The third one is ap, and
this one is the strangest of all.
This is one I really haven't fully
wrapped my brain around, but
I just want to give you a glimpse of how
we know that ap is a little bit strange,
because ap takes in another monad.
You say, monad1.ap and
you pass in monad2, okay?
But what we do with monad2, or
in this case the another monad is,
we call.map on it with our monad's value.
So we call somebody else's
map with our value.
The thing that that should raise,
that should be interesting in your
brain is, what does map always require?
>> Kyle: No, what does map, whenever we
call a map, what do we always pass to it?
We always pass?
>> Speaker 2: An array?
>> Kyle: A mapper function, we always
have to pass a mapper function to map,
just like we always have to pass
a predicate function to filter.
So here we are passing our value to .map,
line 16.
That implies that our value to
use this has to be a function.
That's the strange part, our value would
not be able to be the number 42 or
this would throw an error.
Our number couldn't be an array,
our value couldn't be a string,
our value that our monad
is wrapped around,
if we call a .ap on it,
we have to have a function as our value.
So what kind of function
might we have in our monad?
Well, we might have a curried function
that's got some value remembered in it,
and it's gonna be used as the mapper for
another monad.
So .ap is the strangest of
the three in my opinion, map and
chain seem to have a pretty
straight forward intuition.
.App requires you to think
about that currying thing, and
we're gonna look at that in just a moment.